# VT100 Terminal Backend

The `VT100` class is a ANSI Escape Sequences encoder/decoder, which supports most of the `VT100` and `xterm` subsets being used by current programs. 

## Input Escape Sequences

`ESC M` (RI)

Moves the cursor one line up. 

`ESC =`

Enables the application keypad mode (alters how keypad key presses are encoded when sent to client).

`ESC >`

Enables the normal keypad mode (alters how keypad key presses are encoded when sent to client). 

### CSI sequences

All CSI sequences start with `ESC [` 



### SGR Commands 

These control how the contents is rendered (i.e. colors mostly). Most of the SGR codes are supported. Multiple SGR codes can be given in single escape code, separated by `;`. 

`CSI 0 m` - resets font, foreground and background colors to their default values. 




### Setting private mode variables

Multiple private modes can be updated in single escape code, in which case their numbers are separated with `;`.

- `CSI ? n h` sets private mode `n`
- `CSI ? n l` clears private mode `n`

Private modes are simple settings variables:

- `1` - application cursor mode (different way of encoding cursor keys)
- `7` - autowrap mode (allows only to be set, which is redundant, disabling it is `SEQ_WONT_SUPPORT`)
- `12` - determines whether cursor blinks or not
- `25` - determines whether the cursor is visible or not
- `47` - switching to/from alternate buffer
- `1000` - tracks mouse button presses and releases
- `1002` - button event mouse tracking (see mouse chapter below)
- `1003` - all mouse events are reported (i.e. continuous movement)
- `1006` - SGR mouse encoding. 
- `1049` - switching to/from alternate buffer
- `2004` - bracketed paste mode

The following private modes are parsed, but ignored (`SEQ_WONT_SUPPORT`):

`4` - smooth scrolling.
`1001` - hilite mouse mode - can hang the terminal if clients not fully correct. Not used. 
`1005` - UTF8 mouse encoding (is a bit broken, also not used), but might support this later, if there is a good usecase

Private variables can also be saved and restored (`CSI ? n s` and `CSI ? n r`). This is not supported for any of the modes atm.

### Character Set Specifications

- `ESC ( B`
- `ESC ) B`
- `ESC * B`
- `ESC + B`

Sets various character sets to the US variant. While other character sets (endings other than `B`) are possible, these are not supported. 







# Misc

- http://www.nic.funet.fi/index/doc/hardware/terminals/vt102.codes
- `infocmp vt102 vt220`